[[[ To any NSA and FBI agents reading my email: please consider    ]]]
[[[ whether defending the US Constitution against all enemies,     ]]]
[[[ foreign or domestic, requires you to follow Snowden's example. ]]]

    I do apologize for use of the term "FOSS" in my e-mail. I didn't realize 
    quite how you felt about the cooperation between the free software 
    community and the open-source initiative.

I wouldn't put it that way.

Our whole community is the free software community.  "Open source" was
started by people in the free software community.

Some of the community are free software activists,
some are open source  supporters, some hold intermediate
positions, and some don't think about the issue.

That usually doesn't affect _cooperation_
On practical work, we all cooperate.

However, on symbolic statements, such as what to call
the community, the choice of what to say has practical consequences.

    To defend my statements, the reason I used the term and others like it 
    were because I perceive LinuxFest as a gathering of the open-source 
    community, not necessarily the free software community.

I expect you're right that the event's own posture is to favor open
source.  But you don't have to follow their terminology -- what you
say is up to you.

You don't have to follow me on terminology either.  But you might want
to think about my reasons for my choice.

Basically, if you say "open source" or "FOSS" frequently, you don't
visibly present yourself as a supporter of free software, so we don't
get a kind of support that we need very much.

    The vibe I got from the representative at the booth was 
    not even that they showed interest in participating in the open-source 
    initiative (and certainly not the FSM), but rather that they wanted to 
    use the open-source (and often-times free) software on their own 
    platform (the rep seemed to be particularly highlighting Windows Azure), 
    and to make the software run "better" on that platform to encourage 
    people to use it rather than a free one.

That's what I would expect.  And here the difference between free
software and open source has an effect.  With free software as the
background, they would be recognized be exploiters and would be
drummed out.  However, because open source has abandoned our ethical
concerns, that as a background offers no basis to recognize and
condemn such exploiters.

Thus, I suggest using them as an example to show why we should
support free software rather than open source.

Maybe you'd like to prepare a handout about this and bring copies
to some event.

-- Dr Richard Stallman 
President, Free Software Foundation 
51 Franklin St 
Boston MA 02110 
USA 
www.fsf.org www.gnu.org 
Skype: No way! That's nonfree (freedom-denying) software. 
Use Ekiga or an ordinary phone call. 
